---
title: "App Academy Open - v1 vs v2"
author: zacgra
layout: post
categories: Code
tags: [ruby, rails, learning, aao]
---

### AAO v2 Launch

In April of 2022, App Academy released version 2 of their App Academy Open curriculum. While the older version parallels their 16-week campus software engineering program", this new version parallels their 24-week online software engineering program.

### My AAO Experience

I started AAO v1 at the start of January and worked on it until mid-May. I stopped at the beginning of the Rails section. Then, for the rest of May and June, I worked through AAO v2 up to the end of Data Structures & Algorithms. Both of these stopping points are roughly the end of the "fundamentals" of programming, after which the curriculum shifts more in to frameworks. I estimate that I've worked through about 4-500 hours of the fundamentals curriculum between the two of them.

### Languages & Frameworks

The most obvious differences between v1 and v2 are the languages and frameworks.

Version 1 teaches these languages/frameworks:

1. Ruby
2. SQL/PostgreSQL
3. Ruby on Rails
4. Front-end JavaScript
5. React/Redux
6. MERN

Version 2 teaches these languages/frameworks:

1. JavaScript
2. HTML/CSS
3. Front-End JS
4. Express
5. SQL
6. Sequelize
7. React/Redux
8. Python
9. Flask

### Strengths of v1

- solution sets to most all the problem sets, projects, etc. This is a huge positive, IMO, because you are introduced via these solutions to patterns you might not be familiar with, and if you get really stuck, you are less likely to just give up and move on.
- lots of “from scratch” projects. Specifically in “Ruby”, rather than writing to tests, you build projects up from scratch.
- creating frameworks from scratch. This is a bit further in the AAO v1 curriculum, but you end up building mini versions of ActiveRecord, Rails, and your very own jQuery library.
- spending a lot (200 - 300 hours minimum) of time on fundamentals by building things for the command line. This is either a positive or negative, depending on your expectations. So projects in HTML/CSS/JS don’t come until much later in the course. This means you really focus on mastering programming basics, but if you are working through curriculum fairly slowly, this could also mean you won’t see things you made in the browser for many months.
- Alvin in Intro to Programming and Software Engineering Fundamentals. He is a fantastic teacher and introduces how to think in programming. You really get the feeling like you are being tutored one-on-one with all the videos in those sections, and there are a lot of problems that have the structure of: (1) introduction, (2) now you try, (3) now let’s do a walkthrough of the problem together.
- Haseeb in Data Structures & Algorithms (and a bunch of other sections). He has a very conversational style, which lends to making the quite abstract concepts more approachable.
- using Ruby. To me, this was a great language to really tackle the fundamentals in, because of how readable it is, and as a result, how quickly you can abstract away the language and focus on the concept.

### Common Criticisms of v1

- it is too Ruby and Rails-focused, since the industry has moved on to JS-centric frameworks. There is definitely some truth to that. However, as a teaching tool, I felt like I learned programming more effectively through Ruby that I did in v2 through JavaScript. I think Ruby has a reputation for being a well-designed language.

- the curriculum is old. The oldest Rails content was recorded in 2014, and a lot of the rest of the content I've seen was written/recorded between 2016 and 2019. This criticism is especially valid when directed toward the JavaScript in v1 content, including Rails/Redux, due to the constant evolution of JavaScript and React. From what I've seen, Rails is a pretty stable ecosystem, so the age of the curriculum is less significant.

### Strengths of v2

- the curriculum is full-stack JS, so if you don’t want to have to switch from one language to another, this could be a benefit. It does introduce Python and Flask, at the very end of the curriculum.
- you start out making actual web content right off the bat, with the HTML/CSS project in Web Fundamentals.
- it is newer and based on JS/Node, so setting up your machine is typically better documented and you see less issues from deprecated repos.
- you'll mostly be reading text, so if you get bored by watching videos, this could be a positive.
- it introduces git early on, and with all the skeletons you are required to clone in GitHub, this forces students get more comfortable early.

### Common Criticisms of v2

- it is lacking solution sets. This means that if you have a project to work on and you get stuck, you have no way to move forward without floundering indefinitely. In my opinion, this severely hurts the curriculum. One of the best things you can do when learning is to read others code, especially people who are more advanced than you.
- there are less vidoes, and they are less engaging. To me, the v2 videos are what it would look like if you designed a curriculum intentionally. So they work through each concept just as expected, and they are well done. But the best of the v1 videos are what it would look like if you managed to snag the attention of a more senior engineer and asked “how does an LRU cache work?” It might be a bit rambling, a little organic, but for whatever reason it sticks in my mind more due to it being more conversational.

### My Overall Impressions

I've personally enjoyed my time in AAO v1 more than AAO v2. I think it is the combination of the personalities in v1, the chance to peek behind the curtains when building our own "lite" versions of things, and thethe joy of working in Ruby/Rails. However, AAO v2 does have a lot of potential. It continues to improve with the AAO team working behind the scenes. And AAO v1 is getting long in the tooth. I'm hopeful for the future of AAO, and even with all its flaws, I've yet to come across an equivalent resource that is freely available.
